# Should We Still be Worried about COVID-19?
## San Francisco’s COVID-19 hospitalization trends at a glance 2020-2025

### Introduction & Nut Graph
Shortly after the start of the COVID-19 Pandemic, the San Francisco Department of Public Health has diligently monitored COVID throughout the city of San Francisco through reporting things like hospital admissions. Even after COVID mandates were lifted and COVID vaccines were developed and distributed, the department continues to monitor these numbers and publish them. From this data, we can get a picture of the trends of the pandemic and get an idea of how San Francisco is recovering, or if it is something we should still be worried about. The trends in the data show substantial improvement, but the rates of COVID hospital admissions still fluctuates. The data also shows improvement specifically between the year 2024 and 2025, showing that COVID-19 hospital admissions are going down, but are not going away.

### Data Acquisition
The data used in this story highlights hospital admissions for COVID hospital admission of San Francisco residents in San Francisco hospitals. The specific data includes the total count and rate per 100,000 by week. Data points begin at the start of the pandemic in March of 2020 and continue to July of 2025. The dataset was created using information collected from the San Francisco Department of Public Health (SFDPH). Which receives information reported to them from the COVID Hospital Data Repository. This is an order from the City Health Officer that requires hospitals to report COVID cases to the SFDPH. This reporting system includes all hospitals in the city of San Francisco except the San Francisco VA Medical Center. The data set was last updated in November of 2025. 
	The dataset is most likely trustworthy, as it uses information provided by the hospitals and is collected and compiled by the Department of Public Health. Though the data is trustworthy and provided by a government agency, it is possible that private hospitals are not reporting accurate information, such as under-reporting or over-reporting cases. But this is unlikely as this can be fact checked in other ways by the SFDPH. It is also possible that the information could be altered by the SFDPH, but can also be fact checked through insurance billing information. 
	The data provided does have limitations. It only gives a small snapshot of what COVID looks like in the city of San Francisco. It does not appear to include COVID hospital admissions for non-residents and does not include residents who were hospitalized elsewhere. The data also falls short because it does not include COVID admissions for the VA Medical Center, which is a large medical center in the city. If this data was included, the datapoints and rates might be much higher. Another limitation of the data is that it does not include any demographic information, there is no specification of what groups of people might be most affected or need to be hospitalized. The final limitation is that the number of hospital admissions does not truly reflect the amount of COVID-19 cases in San Francisco. This limits the understanding of how COVID is affecting the city’s population. 

### Data Analysis
[Google Sheet Link] (https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1MCFAeAu0rX65tpm9lC7a39NPoSBOyICC2H0yfZv_Y88/edit?gid=1427564338#gid=1427564338)
The data from 2020-2025 shows a lot about how the trends in hospital admissions changed and how they are beginning to improve in recent years. The data shows that the rate of hospital admissions for COVID-19 increased significantly in the year of 2022, it was much higher than any other year of the pandemic. This begs the question of why? What caused these numbers to rise so starkly and only in the span of around 3 months? Is it possible that this increase lines up with the time the world started to open back up? Did schools and workplaces return to in-person settings? 
In the following years, the data shows a consistent trend downwards, although there is the occasional surge during cold and flu season. But even with these surges, each highest rate of the year becomes smaller and smaller. This can lead to other questions, such as what helped bring the rates? Did COVID-19 cases decrease or did things like vaccines curb the severity of the virus leading to less complications or severe illness? Did the strain become less harmful? 

### Data Visualization

### Summary, Ethics & Process
This information can tell the public a lot. The first being that, yes San Francisco seems to be recovering from the pandemic as hospital admissions decline, and that is still something to be conscious of. The data can also offer researchers interesting opportunities to look into what worked in bringing COVID-19 hospitalizations down and how to apply this in future emergencies. Over all, there are very few ethical concerns with this data set. But it is possible for this data set to be used in a way that can be used to create un reasonable fear around COVID-19 or used as a reason to dismiss concerns and precautions around COVID-19 or similar illnesses. In order to complete this story, demographic information would be helpful to understand what populations are the most vulnerable. But, that can come with ethical risks if one or several specific groups are identified and can then be stigmatized. There is a lot of opportunity for supplemental information in this story, such as when schools reopened for in-person school or the implementation of COVID-19 vaccines to help explain certain spikes in hospital admission or in rapid declines. The input of researchers or specialists on the field would also be extremely valuable to the story. This information would allow others for further interpretation of the data as well as identify recommendations moving forward. Information on how these rates, specifically the large surge in 2021 impacted the health system in San Francisco would also be hugely beneficial to the story and allow a better picture of what that time looked like for medical professionals. The missing data from the San Francisco VA Medical Center would also benefit the story as it would give a more accurate picture to COVIDs impacts on the entire city. This would come with potential ethical concerns as the VA is accountable to different government agencies when reporting information such as this, which might cause complications with privacy and stigmatization. 
